# Don't live angry #

This is another in our occasional teachings on Jesus's Sermon on the Mount. Today's topic is "Don't live angry." 

Scriptures: Matthew 5:21-26 21; Luke 15:1-3, 11b-32

Matthew 5:21-26 21 “You have heard that it was said to those of ancient times, ‘You shall not murder’; and ‘whoever murders shall be liable to judgment.’ 22 But I say to you that if you are angry with a brother or sister,​you will be liable to judgment; and if you insult​a brother or sister,​you will be liable to the council; and if you say, ‘You fool,’ you will be liable to the hell of fire. 23 So when you are offering your gift at the altar, if you remember that your brother or sister has something against you, 24 leave your gift there before the altar and go; first be reconciled to your brother or sister,​ and then come and offer your gift. 25 Come to terms quickly with your accuser while you are on the way to court​with him, or your accuser may hand you over to the judge, and the judge to the guard, and you will be thrown into prison. 26 Truly I tell you, you will never get out until you have paid the last penny.”  

Luke 15:1-3, 11b-32 
1 Now all the tax collectors and sinners were coming near to listen to him. 2 And the Pharisees and the scribes were grumbling and saying, “This fellow welcomes sinners and eats with them.” 

11 Then Jesus​said, “There was a man who had two sons. 12 The younger of them said to his father, ‘Father, give me the share of the property that will belong to me.’ So he divided his property between them. 13 A few days later the younger son gathered all he had and traveled to a distant country, and there he squandered his property in dissolute living. 14 When he had spent everything, a severe famine took place throughout that country, and he began to be in need. 15 So he went and hired himself out to one of the citizens of that country, who sent him to his fields to feed the pigs. 16 He would gladly have filled himself with​ the pods that the pigs were eating; and no one gave him anything. 17 But when he came to himself he said, ‘How many of my father’s hired hands have bread enough and to spare, but here I am dying of hunger! 18 I will get up and go to my father, and I will say to him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you; 19 I am no longer worthy to be called your son; treat me like one of your hired hands.” ’ 20 So he set off and went to his father. But while he was still far off, his father saw him and was filled with compassion; he ran and put his arms around him and kissed him. 21 Then the son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you; I am no longer worthy to be called your son.’​22 But the father said to his slaves, ‘Quickly, bring out a robe—the best one—and put it on him; put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet. 23 And get the fatted calf and kill it, and let us eat and celebrate; 24 for this son of mine was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found!’ And they began to celebrate. 
25 “Now his elder son was in the field; and when he came and approached the house, he heard music and dancing. 26 He called one of the slaves and asked what was going on. 27 He replied, ‘Your brother has come, and your father has killed the fatted calf, because he has got him back safe and sound.’ 28 Then he became angry and refused to go in. His father came out and began to plead with him. 29 But he answered his father, ‘Listen! For all these years I have been working like a slave for you, and I have never disobeyed your command; yet you have never given me even a young goat so that I might celebrate with my friends. 30 But when this son of yours came back, who has devoured your property with prostitutes, you killed the fatted calf for him!’ 31 Then the father​said to him, ‘Son, you are always with me, and all that is mine is yours. 32 But we had to celebrate and rejoice, because this brother of yours was dead and has come to life; he was lost and has been found.’ ” 

---

I would like to tell you this morning of two insights I've had into this section of the Sermon on the Mount. First, you should know (if you don't already), that anger is one of my own besetting sins. This either means you're getting insider's knowledge or the usual statements of a hypocrite. I hope it's more of the former and less of the latter.

In fact, as I went to the coffee shop to write up my thoughts, I stopped to visit my father in the nursing home. He had his headphones sort of on, but the volume turned down and the headphones plugged into the wrong input on the television. His hearing aids weren't working, and although the television was blaring, he could not really hear it or me. He told me to get his "hearing aids" from the top shelf of his clothes. He meant his hearing aid batteries, but I thought he meant his hearing aid cleaning kit. I searched through the clothes, and found neither. I did find his cleaning kit (in the usual place), and despite my cleaning them, the didn't work. I found a couple of batteries with the kit, but it didn't appear to be the batteries that were the problem. I connected the headphones, turned up the volume, and placed them on his head and said my goodbyes. He told me to look for "them" on the top shelf, and I had a little blow up. "THEY'RE NOT THERE!" I wish I could say that I was just trying to speak loudly so he could hear, but anyone who overheard would have heard that edge of anger. In frustrated compliance, I started looking again, and found the hearing aids on the top mini-shelf on the second-to-the-top shelf. He was glad I found them; I put them back, and took my (somewhat brusque) leave.

So, here is the person who will talk to you about anger management: someone who cannot even control his anger enough to be kind to an old, confused man unable to get out of his own bed; a man to whom he happens to owe his very existence. If you want to just tune out at this point, I'd understand.

Let's read the Matthew passage. 

The thing that's usually said about this passage is to note how Jesus is making things easier for us. He is not just restricting us from murdering one another, but from even insulting and getting angry with one another. He has not come to abolish the Law, but to fulfill it (Matthew 5:17); that is, to let the Law fill every area, fully, to which it could apply. So, murder is bad; anger is a kind of "murder light," but the penalty of anger is the same as that for murder. So, we should "come terms quickly with our accuser." That is, we need to act swiftly to get our punishment taken care of: and, by this, we usually understand this to mean to look to the means God has provided to escape the punishment that we are due, that is, Jesus himself.

The other thing that's usually said about this passage is to stress how important reconciliation is: if we are in the middle of worship, and we realize that we need to be reconciled to someone who has something against us, we should should leave worship immediately and take care of this. God, we know, can be infinitely patient in receiving the glory due him, and he wants people who worship him to be pure in heart. He's willing to wait while we take care of our social business. 

But the first insight I'd like to share with you is this: what kind of might our brother or sister have against us that we should rush off to be reconciled with him or her? Does it not make sense that Jesus is talking about _unjustified anger_ with our brother or sister? I think it does. This is important because it puts a particular spin on this passage, which is this: _Unjust anger is especially corrosive to community, and must be taken care of quickly_. 

Jesus's apostle Paul would later write this very practical advice: _Do not let the sun go down on your anger._ (Ephesians 4:25). Sometimes, this is called keeping "short accounts," that is, don't let the things that irritate you grow and grow and grow until one day you explode. But getting back to this insight, we need to be especially careful about our own unjust anger towards others. 

We should work to heal any brokenness between us and others if we can; we should work to heal any brokenness we have caused; and this is especially true of unjust anger towards others.

The parable of the family of the prodigal son shows this clearly. As the younger son returns to the family, the older son is angry at the two people to whom he closest. He's angry at his brother for getting something good he didn't deserve, and for being bad. He's angry at his father for never giving him a party like his brother was getting. You can tell these resentments have burned long and deep. The father explains why the older son should rejoice, but it's not clear he will--we are left not knowing what his decision was. But we surely know that his anger was cold comfort, not nearly as nice as the fatted calf and the warm fellowship of renewed relationships. Although the brother's anger is rooted in some justice (the younger son was "prodigal," after all, and the father hadn't noticed the older son's desires), he loses out on the life of celebration and joy his father promises him because of his coldness.

The other insight into this passage is to consider what it and other scripture teaches us about the relationship between our (unjust) anger and the (just) wrath of God. Jesus reminds us that there is one who will judge justly (and we should do what we can to escape his wrath, as I said earlier, by taking on the way offered to us by Jesus Christ in his unjust death on the cross).

Remember, we looked at Paul's take on this in Romans 12 some time back:

> Romans 12:18-21 If it is possible, so far as it depends on you, live peaceably with all. 19 Beloved, never avenge yourselves, but leave room for the wrath of God;​for it is written, “Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.” 20 No, “if your enemies are hungry, feed them; if they are thirsty, give them something to drink; for by doing this you will heap burning coals on their heads.” 21 Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.

How interesting! Another reason to not take our anger out on others is that we should leave it to God to mete out justice. We are to be a people of peace, peace in our church lives, peace in our individual lives, as much as we can make it happen. On the one hand, we don't have to worry (like the other brother) that the unjust won't eventually get what's coming to them. God will, in God's own time, take care of things (remember last week's teaching: at least for today, God has given us time and life enough to respond to him). On the other, Paul gives us another very practical method for dealing with those we dislike and are angry with: treat them as if we liked them: give them food and drink. We may, thereby, overcome the evil with good: not only the evil in the people with whom we are angry: but also the evil anger that is within ourselves.

So, this angry person's new insights into Jesus's view of anger:

1. Unjust anger towards others corrodes our relationships, and we should work to stop it immediately.
2. We should leave vengeance to God who can clearly judge what punishments, and what mercies, are best provided.

And a reminder of a couple of practical things we can do to curb our anger:

1. Don't stew in our anger, but keep short accounts. Take care of small problems before they become big ones.
2. Offer good to those who anger us, hoping that this will change both the hearts of others and our own hard hearts.

When I think about what happened with my father, it would help to not dwell on his faults, and it I know it has helped to be kind to him. This teaching of Jesus, as elaborated by Paul, works. Not, of course, immediately and magically, but in the general course of things we want to live a life of celebration and joy, not a life of anger and bitterness. 

Our Father God says to each of us:

> My Daughter, My Son, you are always with me, and all that is mine is yours. Come, celebrate and rejoice. Take the robe I have for you, the ring I have for you, the delightful food I have for you. Others were lost and now are found; Once you were dead, but now I offer you life. 