= Who made me a judge and divider over you? =
Kalamazoo Mennonite Fellowship  
August 1, 2010 
Will Fitzgerald 

Luke 12:13-34

> 13 Someone in the crowd said to him, “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the family inheritance with me.” 14 But he said to him, “Friend, who set me to be a judge or arbitrator over you?” 15 And he said to them, “Take care! Be on your guard against all kinds of greed; for one’s life does not consist in the abundance of possessions.” 16 Then he told them a parable: “The land of a rich man produced abundantly. 17 And he thought to himself, ‘What should I do, for I have no place to store my crops?’ 18 Then he said, ‘I will do this: I will pull down my barns and build larger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my goods. 19 And I will say to my soul, Soul, you have ample goods laid up for many years; relax, eat, drink, be merry.’ 20 But God said to him, ‘You fool! This very night your life is being demanded of you. And the things you have prepared, whose will they be?’ 21 So it is with those who store up treasures for themselves but are not rich toward God.” 

> 22 He said to his disciples, “Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat, or about your body, what you will wear. 23 For life is more than food, and the body more than clothing. 24 Consider the ravens: they neither sow nor reap, they have neither storehouse nor barn, and yet God feeds them. Of how much more value are you than the birds! 25 And can any of you by worrying add a single hour to your span of life? 26 If then you are not able to do so small a thing as that, why do you worry about the rest? 27 Consider the lilies, how they grow: they neither toil nor spin; yet I tell you, even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one of these. 28 But if God so clothes the grass of the field, which is alive today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, how much more will he clothe you—you of little faith! 29 And do not keep striving for what you are to eat and what you are to drink, and do not keep worrying. 30 For it is the nations of the world that strive after all these things, and your Father knows that you need them. 31 Instead, strive for his kingdom, and these things will be given to you as well. 
32 “Do not be afraid, little flock, for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom. 33 Sell your possessions, and give alms. Make purses for yourselves that do not wear out, an unfailing treasure in heaven, where no thief comes near and no moth destroys. 34 For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also. 

I have heard people say that they are saving up questions to ask Jesus. And it would be interesting to consider this exercise: if there were exactly one question you could ask Jesus, what would it be? Any ideas?

In this story, an anonymous man gets his one chance. In fact, it looks like he is a forward person who doesn't even wait to get Jesus alone. In Luke 12, Jesus is shown teaching to a crowd "gathered by the thousands," and so I imagine he shouts out his question _while Jesus is teaching._ That's a pretty bold thing to do, and it's the kind of initiative that Jesus seems to admire on other occasions. 

But look at the question this anonymous person asks. In fact, it is not a question at all, but a request, even a demand: Tell my brother to divide the family inheritance with me. And this is what the man who has this unique opportunity asks: make my brother split up the loot. To be fair, it might be that his brother has acted unjustly, and somehow managed to finagle the family fortune for his own good, and the request is a request for justice. But we'll never know, because Jesus declares it is not his job to arbitrate family financial disputes. Jesus declares, “Friend, who set me to be a judge or arbitrator over you?”

And this is the totality of the answer given specifically to this man: a friendly refusal to be enmeshed in his family's business. Jesus doesn't miss a beat, though: he turns again to the crowd and makes a point: Life is not about having wealth. And he tells a story about a man who appears wise but who is really a fool. The man is a good farmer, and he has a very good crop one year: so much, he cannot store it all, so he decides to build even larger barns to store it all. And he is happy, because he feels as if he has enough wealth to last him the rest of his life. He's right: he does have enough wealth to last the rest of his life. Unfortunately for him, rather than having years left to live, he has mere hours, and all his wealth will do him no good in his afterlife. 

Jesus tells the crowd, and us, that life is not about having wealth. Jesus tells us that life is about striving for the kingdom, that is, to be a part of God's plan for extending God's visible reign over creation. And our worldly wealth has a part in this striving. We are told to get rid of things that we don't need and "give alms." With your money, you can work together with people from all over the world to see God's kingdom expand. All of our possessions will eventually wear out: they are temporary. Someone recently asked on Facebook for recommendations for good luggage, and I replied that I have found that luggage just doesn't last very long, so one should just buy relatively inexpensive luggage that will only last a few dozen trips. Perhaps I should have said we should buy luggage that never wears out, luggage that holds kingdom value. But what is permanent?


1. Of course, _God_ is permanent. 

2. Paul reminds us that _Love, Faith, and Hope_ are permanent. "Love never ends ... Now faith, hope and love abide, these three, and the greatest of these is love."

3. And CS Lewis reminds us that what is permanent is people:

> It is a serious thing to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, to remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you talk to may one day be a creature which, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to worship, or else a horror and a corruption such as you now meet, if at all, only in a nightmare. All day long we are, in some degree, helping each other to one or other of these destinations. It is in the light of these overwhelming possibilities, it is with the awe and the circumspection proper to them, that we should conduct all our dealings with one another, all friendships, all loves, all play, all politics. There are no 'ordinary' people. You have never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilizations -- these are mortal, and their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. But it is immortals whom we joke with, work with, marry, snub and exploit -- immortal horrors or everlasting splendors. (CS Lewis, _The Weight of Glory_)

And, so our impermanent wealth should be used to glorify God, to extend the reign of faith, hope and love, and to help one another be the "possible gods and goddesses" of immortal glory. Our treasure and our delight is meant to be God and people: loving, hoping, and having faith. God promises to take care of our day to day needs, just has God does for such impermanent creatures as flowers and birds. 

In fact, Jesus reminds us that God delights in giving us the kingdom, so that our striving looks more like responding to God's delightful gift, and our aligning our wealth to God's wealth. And Jesus reminds us that looking at our spending patterns will reveal what we really care about: "where your treasure is, there your heart is also." 

So, perhaps, this is a spiritual discipline to take on this week: what do _your_ spending patterns reveal about what you care about? You might also consider asking about how you spend your time, which is of course also a precious resource at our disposal. And, perhaps, you'd be willing to share your reflections on this next week.

