# Liberty #
July 4, 2010  
Will Fitzgerald  
Kalamazoo Mennonite Fellowship  

2 Kings 5:1-14  
Luke 10:1-11   

The scripture passages this morning are not specifically about how believers are to think about government. But today is the Fourth of July, after all, and we are encouraged in the United States to celebrate the founding of our nation. And sometimes it is interesting to take a slant look at scriptures, applying them where their main theme is not the topic of interest, just to see what happens. So, we look at the story of Naaman and the sending of the seventy this morning to see what we can glean from the edges to answer this question: How should American Christians think about their own country?

The first thing we notice about the story of Naaman is how international it is. Of course, the Old Testament is largely about God's dealings with Israel, and, usually, we see "the nations" mostly through the lens of Israel, its history, and its relationship to God. The nations are used to punish Israel, or Israel takes land from the nations, and so on. But on occasion, we see hints of God's plans for people outside of Israel that are not specifically about Israel per se, and this story is one of them.

Naaman is a government official, not from Israel, and he has a skin disease. I assume that Naaman is distressed not so much because it makes him ritually impure (as it would a Israelite) but because it is disfiguring or painful or both. And it wants it fixed, and he is willing to take desperate measures. He's tried everything, and he hears about a miracle cure in another land. This story repeats itself every day--how often do you hear a similar tale of the failure of modern medicine followed by some desperate act? Anyway, Naaman does the same thing. He travels to Israel to take the cure. He's disconcerted for a while--it doesn't seem like anything he couldn't have done back home--but (and this is what makes this story different from almost all such stories) it works, and Naaman is cured.

Jesus uses this story to teach that God is reaching out to all nations, that even those who are seen as unlovable and unsalvageable are loved, and can be saved. Jesus says that there were plenty of people whom God could have healed in Israel, but that God chose Naaman to make this point: people from all nations can enter the kingdom (even as he affirmed the notion of Israel's special time of being chosen to bear witness to God's law and love).

And so, this is a point: We rightly rejoice in the pleasures and delights of being an American: our relative freedom of speech, religion, want and fear, the beauty of our countryside, the diversity of our peoples, our educational and economic systems. But we are not exceptionally good or chosen, just exceptionally lucky--or, if you want it in religious words, exceptionally blessed. God is declaring a new kingdom, with Jesus as its head, and it is for all people: for Americans (thank God), but also people from "all tribes and nations." We, as Americans, are not God's chosen people; no ethnic group is exclusively God's chosen people. Rather, God's kingdom is for individuals in power like Naaman, for people in service like Naaman's maiden, for those powerfully capable and set apart for great deeds, like Elisha, for people like you, and for people like me, from all lands and times.

So, let us take advantage of our relative freedom of speech to speak openly about this kingdom and its availability to all. Let us take advantage of our relative freedom of religion to worship God. Let us take advantage of our relative freedom from want to create great things and help those who are in need. Let us take advantage of our relative freedom from fear to participate actively in the lives of our communities.

Jesus's sending the 70 (or 72, let's not get hung up on the exact number) is another story of the kingdom spreading. It's especially interesting that Jesus sends the disciples to places where he hasn't been before. Jesus is preparing them for their live after his death: Jesus's plan is that the kingdom should spread, and he knows they will have to be able to do the work of spreading the kingdom without his being physically present. They are eventually going to have to rely on the Spirit to know where to go, not just follow him around. They will eventually have to answer the question, "What would Jesus do?" and not just look over their should at what Jesus is doing. And this is their first learning experience at doing so.

Jesus's instructions couldn't be clearer: go out with nothing to rely on but one another, the Spirit, and the barest of necessities and rely on the kindness of strangers to receive the good news that the kingdom of God "has come near them." And of what does the kingdom consist? Well, this is not exactly spelled out, but we do get glimpses of the signs of the kingdom. The disciples are given power to heal those who are sick, and to pronounce peace on the families with which they stay. It involves fellowship and hospitality, to the extent that when hospitality is not offered in a town, they are to move on, and give a dire warning that they have missed out. In other words, to those who welcome them, they proclaim the blessing: The kingdom of God has come near. To those who do not welcome them, the proclaim the same, but as a warning and a curse: The kingdom of God has come near. The kingdom is near, and you receive it: blessing. The kingdom is near, and you miss it: so close, yet so far; a curse.

It is an argument from silence, but a reasonable one, to note what the message of the kingdom is not: it's not a new political system; it's not a means to save civilization; it's not a social network; it's not a new economic structure exactly. It is a kingdom, but its king is God alone. It's not a civilization, but a people. In this particular case, the disciples, all Jews, go out to speak to other Jews, which suggests that the primary means of knowing whether someone was Jewish (that is, their parents, or at least their mother, were Jewish), would not be the test in the new kingdom. You don't get a pass into the kingdom because your parents are in the kingdom. Rather, the citizens of these villages needed to hear anew God's call to a holy and devout life.

I'm always pleased when I read the passage about how excited the disciples are when they return to Jesus: they have trusted in the Spirit and done what Jesus called them to do, and God has been faithful to Jesus's word: they have seen the results, including Satan himself rushing down from the heavenlies to support the demonic spirits in opposition to the kingdom. Jesus reminds them that miracles and wonders are not the point: they should rejoice that they have had the kingdom revealed to them and have they have had their names written down as kingdom members.

So on this 4th of July, we are reminded that the Kingdom of God is God's announcement to the world of God's new order for the world: not a government nor a social program, but a diverse people whose ruler is God and whose rule is love. We might salute the flag on this day, but it's not because we place our primary loyalty there, but to God alone and to God's people. We can even be grateful to the men and women who fight and die to protect our country's interests, but we, as members of a different and alternative kingdom, work hard to share the message of peace with God and work towards peace with one another.

How do you get into this kingdom? It appears to be trusting in Jesus and his message about it. What do you do when you get there? It appears to be the same old thing: love, and reliance on the Spirit, and peace, and healing; fellowship and work together. Of course, there is much, much more, but here are some of the points raised in this passage.
