Oaths

Matthew 5:33-37

33 “Again, you have heard that it was said to those of ancient times, ‘You shall not swear falsely, but carry out the vows you have made to the Lord.’ 34 But I say to you, Do not swear at all, either by heaven, for it is the throne of God, 35 or by the earth, for it is his footstool, or by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. 36 And do not swear by your head, for you cannot make one hair white or black. 37 Let your word be ‘Yes, Yes’ or ‘No, No’; anything more than this comes from the evil one.

This is another in our occasional series on the Sermon on the Mount. In Matthew 5:33-37, Jesus talks about the taking of oaths. In many ways, it is a very clear and very easy passage to understand, but in other ways, it is a kind of a mind-bomb that explodes our understanding of what it means to talk to one another, to live in this world, and to live in the kingdom of God.

A vow or oath is a kind of promise. The classic oath is a promise that you make while invoking God as your witness, and asking God to judge your action, especially if you don't keep your promise. When Abraham wanted his servant to go to the land of his fathers to find a wife for Abraham's son Isaac, Abraham made the servant swear an oath:

> I want you to swear by the LORD, the God of heaven and the God of earth, that you will not get a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I am living, but will go to my country and my own relatives and get a wife for my son Isaac. (Genesis 24:3-4)

It was very important to Abraham that this happen, so he asked his servant to swear by God that he would do this thing. So, in its simplest sense, an oath or a vow simply _strongly intensifies_ the promise you make, by bringing God into the picture.

In addition to promises of future action, you can also make an oath regarding actions you have already taken, or things you have seen. In our courtrooms, we might be asked to swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. This is specifically a promise to tell the truth about matters, and when we are asked to swear on the Bible, we try to bring God into the picture. 

Jesus seems to be saying: you don't need to intensify your language; you don't need to try to get God to do your work for you. If you are going to do something, just say "Yes," and do it. If you are not going to do something, just say, "No," and don't do it. Anything more than this is not from God, but, in fact, from evil.

When the early Anabaptists were reading this passage, many of them took it very seriously--partly because it is such a plain teaching. And they paid a price for it. For another thing about oaths and vows is that they often take place in the public sphere: it is in court that we are asked to swear, etc. And for the early Anabaptists to say they would not take oaths was to say something about the rulers in that public sphere: they didn't have the right to ask people to swear, that this demand was an evil one. This (along with their pesky demand that only adult believers be baptized, and thus make the church a different thing that the state), threatened the state's powers. And it has been a long and difficult journey for Anabaptists to get to the point where we are now able to "affirm," rather than to "swear" to tell the truth. One article I read said that the Anabaptist prohibition against oaths has been the most consistent mark of the Anabaptist movement, which is an interesting thing to think about.

You can move from this prohibition on formal oaths and sworn promises to other kinds of languages easily enough. Usually, when we say someone is "swearing," we mean they are using various kinds of "bad language." In English, we have a lot of swear words that come from the sacred. I won't rehearse them for you, but when we damn people or things because they bother us so, we can see the same impulse to intensify our language and bring God into the picture. You can see the silliness of asking God to damn someone for cutting us off in traffic easily enough, and many have taken this prohibition against oaths to apply to this kind of swearing as well. There are a few other scriptures that prohibit "foul language," too, of course.

When someone swears in this derived sense, we sometimes say they are using "strong" language. Jesus is saying we don't need to strengthen our language: our yes and our no are enough; we don't need to complicate things about invoking God or elaborating rituals or using fancy language.

Now, there are some problems with this, in addition to the fact that it sometimes gets us into trouble with the world. A wide variety of questions get raised and certain things happen when people just say what they mean, and no more. 

First, it is always clear whether Jesus is referring to any strong language whatsoever, or just language that invokes God as witness and judge, or with respect to future actions (rather than truth-telling). Paul, for example, calls on God as his witness (For example, Romans 1:9: "For God is my witness that I make mention of you in my prayers.") This has, in fact, caused lots of debates over the years.

Second, it is not always clear what one should consider too strong. For example, I have to say that many Mennonites I have met have often lacked as sense of humor or literature that is based on word-play. This was one of the things that struck Bess and me when we first were among Mennonites. Many Mennonites are known for their quietness and lack of words; I am convinced (at least until it is proven otherwise) that this comes out of the reaction against oaths. 

Third, this desire not to use strong language can mean a certain lack of emotional engagement; again, thinking about Mennonites being "the quiet in the land" suggests that you're not going to have a lot of toe-to-toe discussions about things that matter; Mennonites, in my experience, have a certain tendency towards passive aggression and putting up with things too long because (among other things), they want to retain a certain simplicity of language. 

I could go on. 

Bess pointed out a certain parallel between what happened on Palm Sunday and this whole section about keeping the law. Palm Sunday is, of course, a very odd holiday. We are celebrating along with the crowds of Jerusalem the coming of the Messiah; We shout "Hosanna" along with them. But we know that in just a few days time, that same crowd will be shouting they have no king but Caesar, and to crucify the one they hailed a few days earlier as Messiah. We are celebrating a day of strong language and, really, oath-breaking. 

But it is right to praise our Messiah Jesus, for he deserves the praise of Zion. On the other hand, we are unable to really put our "yes" and "no" in action; we often find ourselves, like those crowds, turning our back on the work and command of Messiah Jesus. Should we say nothing, like quiet Mennonites, afraid to say "yes" when we really mean "no"? But then the very rocks will cry out. Should we join with the enthusiastic throng, caught up in the spirit and the excitement? But then we might get caught up in the wrong crowd, enthusiastically failing to follow the way of Jesus's kingdom. 

Messiah Jesus accepts the praise of the crowd, even as he is careful not to give himself up to the crowd. He then does the remarkable thing of dying for this crowd, and asking God to forgive the crowd for their ignorance.

The Palm Sunday story is at least this: the story of people who say strongly say "yes," and then say, "no." They cut down trees, shout blessings, cry "Hosannah," and they mean every word, for the time being. Let us keep our language simple and clear, knowing that we will often fail to keep the whole of this law, over applying it at times, under applying it at others. Let us remember, too, that we have a savior who died for liars and oath-breakers like you and me; for the humorless and the passive-agressive; for those over sensitive to oaths, and to those under sensitive -- just as he died for the angry and the unattached; the adulterers and all who lust; the divorced and the wrongly married. 

Hosannah probably means, "God save us." So let us say: Hosannah, God save us. Hosannah, God save us.
