# Meeting for Business #
Kalamazoo Mennonite Fellowship  
January 24, 2009  
 
## Minutes ##

The first Meeting for Business of Kalamazoo Mennonite Fellowship met on 
January 24, 2009.

The following actions were taken.

1. A constitution for the Kalamazoo Mennonite Fellowship was adopted. The 
body of the constitution can found in the appendix.

2. Janine Byler was elected as fellowship treasurer. Her term runs through 
January 24, 2011. 

3. Will Fitzgerald was elected as head of council. His term runs through 
January 24, 2011.

Respectively submitted,  
Will Fitzgerald

## Appendix: The constitution of the Kalamazoo Mennonite Fellowship ##
(Adopted January 24, 2010)

1. *Name.* The name of this organization is "Kalamazoo Mennonite Fellowship".

2. *Mission.* Our mission is to be a fellowship of faithful disciples of Jesus 
   Christ, "for no one can lay any foundation other than the one already laid, 
   which is Jesus Christ." (1 Corinthians 3:11).

3. *Affiliation.* We are affiliated with the Mennonite Church USA, within the 
   Indiana-Michigan Mennonite Conference. We accept the Confession of Faith in 
   a Mennonite Perspective (1995) as our basic statement of belief and 
   practice.


4. *Members.* We have two kinds of members: regular members and associate 
   members.

   Regular membership is extended to those who:
      1. Trust in Jesus Christ for their salvation,
      2. Commit to follow the teachings and example of Jesus Christ,
      3. Have received a Christian baptism,
      4. Commit to active participation in the life of the Fellowship.
   
   If someone seeking membership is currently a member of another Christian 
   church, it is normally expected that the person's church provide a letter 
   of transfer. Exceptions can be approved by the Council.  Membership must be 
   approved by the Council. 
   
   Associate Membership is extended to any who prefer an associate status, and 
   whose desire for association is approved by the Council.

   The membership of persons who persist in flagrant disobedience to the 
   teachings and example of Jesus Christ may be removed by the the Council by 
   at least a two-thirds majority vote. The fellowship and Council will be 
   guided by the principles of Matthew 18:15-17. The membership of persons who 
   persist in inactive participation may be removed by the Council by a simple 
   majority vote. 

   All members are entitled to participate in the active life of the 
   Fellowship. Regular members who are at least 16 years of age are eligible 
   to vote on all questions at Meetings for Business. Regular members who are 
   at least 18 years of age are eligible to be members of the Council.

5. *The Council.* The Council exercises general pastoral and administrative 
   responsibility. 

   The Council consists of all regular members who are at least 18 years of age. 
   The number and constitution of the Council may be changed by at least a 
   two-thirds vote of voting members.

   The Council sets its own times for meeting, which may be called by a simple 
   majority of members. A quorum for a Council meeting is at least two-thirds 
   of its members. Members of the Council must recuse themselves from voting on 
   matters affecting themselves directly.
   
6. *Offices*  

  1. *Head of Council* A head of council is to be elected annually to lead the 
  Council in fulfilling its pastoral and administrative responsibilities. 
   
  2. *Treasurer.* A treasurer is to be elected annually to receive, record and 
     disburse funds. The treasurer is to present a report of receipts, 
     expenditures and holdings at a Meeting for Business at least annually, 
     and to propose, with the advice and consent of the Council, a budget at 
     a Meeting for Business at least annually, which must be approved by a 
     majority of the voting members.

     The head of  council and the treasurer will  have signing authority
     for fellowship disbursements. The  head of council and  the treasure must  
     not be from the  same immediate family.

  3. Other committees and offices may be proposed and voted upon at a Meeting 
     for Business. 
   
  4. Should anyone be unable or unwilling to continue in their duties until 
     the next annual meeting, a replacement is to be named by the Council. 
   
7. *Meeting for Business.*  We will have a Meeting for Business at least once 
   per year. A Meeting for Business can be called by the Council or by a 
   petition to Council signed by at least one-half of voting members. The 
   Council ensures the Meeting for Business is announced in at least two 
   Sunday Meetings for Worship before the Meeting for Business, and that all 
   reasonable care is taken to inform Members and Associate Members of the 
   Meeting for Business.

   The quorum for a Meeting for Business is a majority of voting members. 
   Anyone may attend a Meeting for Business. Unless otherwise stated, 
   decisions are made by a majority of attending voting members.

   Meetings for Business are chaired by the head of council. Meetings for 
   Business are to be conducted decently and in order, using Robert's Rules 
   for Order as necessary.
   
8. *Amendments.* This constitution and its by-laws by be changed or repealed 
   at a Meeting for Business by at least a two-thirds majority.


